feat: Use ephemeral self-signed cert to sign working store / archive (#1839)
contentauth/c2pa-rs: docs/working-stores.md

# Working stores and C2PA archives

This document explains how **working stores** and **C2PA archives** work in the C2PA SDK, how they relate to each other, and how to save and restore builder state.

## Working stores vs C2PA archives

**Working store** and **C2PA archive** refer to the same underlying concept; the difference is one of emphasis:

| Term | Emphasis |
|------|----------|

> | **Working store** | The *content*: an editable C2PA manifest state (claims, ingredients, assertions) that has not yet been bound to a final asset. Often used when describing the in-memory or serialized form of “work in progress” manifest data. |

Reviewer: `or serialized form` can easily be confused with an archived one, but I don't think it's what is meant here.

| **C2PA archive** | The *artifact*: the saved bytes (e.g. in a `.c2pa` file or stream) that you get from saving a working store and read back to restore a `Builder`. |

Both use the **same on-disk/wire format**: standard JUMBF `application/c2pa`. That is, a C2PA archive *is* a working store serialized as a normal C2PA manifest store. The spec does not define a separate “archive” format; the SDK reuses the standard manifest store format so that:

- The same format is used for **signed manifests** (bound to an asset), **working stores** (saved for later editing), and **saved ingredients** (e.g. validated once, reused in other manifests).

> - Archives can be embedded in files, stored in the cloud, or saved as sidecar `.c2pa` files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- An archive can be embedded in files, stored in the cloud, or saved as sidecar `.c2pa` files.
```
(Otherwise it could be read as you can embed multiple different archives/working stores.We should distinguish adding multiple ingredients through an archived ingredient, and adding 1 archived builder/working store).

**Distinction in practice:**

- When you **save** a `Builder` with `to_archive()`, you produce a **working store** (serialized as JUMBF `application/c2pa`). That serialized form is what we call a **C2PA archive**.

> - When you **restore** with `from_archive()` or `with_archive()`, you read that **C2PA archive** back into a `Builder` — i.e. you restore the **working store** so you can continue editing.

Reviewer: Add a precision that adding another working store as ingredient won't merge them please.

So: one concept, two names. “Working store” stresses the editable state; “C2PA archive” stresses the saved, portable representation.

### Legacy ZIP archive format

The SDK also supports an older archive format: a **ZIP** file containing `manifest.json`, `resources/`, and `manifests/`. (See [Settings](./settings.md) for more information on settings.) This format is generated when the setting `builder.generate_c2pa_archive` is `false`. When `builder.generate_c2pa_archive` is `true` (the default), `to_archive()` writes the **C2PA (working store) format** described above. Restore (`with_archive` / `from_archive`) accepts both: it tries the ZIP format first, then falls back to the C2PA format.

---

## How a working store is saved (C2PA format)

When using the C2PA archive format, saving a `Builder` does the following:

1. The `Builder`’s manifest data (assertions, ingredients, etc.) is prepared for signing.
2. A **BoxHash** assertion is generated over an **empty asset** (placeholder), so the manifest is not bound to any real content.

> 3. The manifest is signed with an **ephemeral self-signed certificate** (e.g. `c2pa-archive.local`). This signature is only for tamper detection in a private context; it is not intended for public trust.

Reviewer: Not sure what the eg. means here? Cert name?

Author: Removing it.

4. The signed manifest is serialized as JUMBF `application/c2pa` and written to the output stream (e.g. a file or `Vec<u8>`).

That stream is the **C2PA archive** (the serialized working store).

The following sequence diagram shows the flow when `Builder::to_archive(stream)` is called.

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    autonumber
    participant App as Application
    participant Builder as Builder
    participant Internal as SDK (internal)
    participant Signer as EphemeralSigner
    participant Stream as Stream / .c2pa file

    App->>Builder: to_archive(stream)
    Builder->>Internal: Prepare manifest, add BoxHash over empty asset
    Internal->>Signer: Ephemeral signer (e.g. c2pa-archive.local)
    Internal->>Internal: Sign and serialize to JUMBF
    Internal-->>Builder: JUMBF bytes (application/c2pa)
    Builder->>Stream: write_all(c2pa_data)
    Builder-->>App: Ok(())
```

---

## How a working store is restored

Restoring from a C2PA archive does the following:

1. The archive stream is read and parsed as JUMBF `application/c2pa`.

> 2. A **Reader** is created and populated from that stream. NOTE: validation is performed with trust validation disabled so the ephemeral archive signature can be accepted.

Reviewer: In the future, we should consider people using trusted certificate (in the future = not this PR), especially if this approach sticks around.

The following sequence diagram shows the flow when `Builder::from_archive(stream)` or `with_archive(stream)` is called and the archive is in C2PA (JUMBF) format.

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    autonumber
    participant App as Application
    participant Builder as Builder
    participant ArchiveStream as Archive stream
    participant Internal as SDK (internal)
    participant Reader as Reader

    App->>Builder: from_archive(stream) or with_archive(stream)
    Builder->>Builder: Try ZIP format first
    alt C2PA format (ZIP attempt failed)
        Builder->>ArchiveStream: rewind()
        Builder->>Internal: Read stream and parse as JUMBF (application/c2pa)
        Internal->>ArchiveStream: read
        Internal-->>Builder: parsed JUMBF data
        Builder->>Reader: Create Reader (from context)
        Builder->>Reader: Populate from parsed JUMBF (validation relaxed)
        Reader->>Reader: Build manifests, ingredients, assertions
        Builder->>Reader: into_builder()
        Reader-->>Builder: Builder (restored)
        Builder-->>App: Ok(builder)
    end
```

---

## API summary

| Operation | API | Description |
|-----------|-----|-------------|

> | Save | `builder.to_archive(&mut stream)` | Writes the working store (C2PA or legacy ZIP) to `stream`. |

Reviewer: Since it's a quick ref, also indicate which setting does what

> | Restore (new Builder) | `Builder::from_archive(stream)` | Creates a default-context `Builder` and loads the archive into it. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Restore as Builder with default context | `Builder::from_archive(stream)` | Creates a default-context `Builder` and loads the archive into it. |
```
"Restore" and "new Builder" is a bit hard to process... Just restoring or reloading?
